comp.ai.neural-nets #5751 (16 more)                              (1)--(1)--(1)
From: M.Hewetson@cs.ucl.ac.uk (Mike Hewetson)                   -(1)



[1] Re: Pygmalion                                               -[1]
Date: Mon Mar 09 03:28:24 CST 1992
Lines: 35


Mathias,

(Apologies that you did not receive a reply to your email request to UCL about
Pygmalion - can you tell me the date you sent it and I will check who was
actioned to reply.)

Pygmalion (ESPRIT II 2059) was a neurocomputing project which produced a
neural programming environment.  The main parts of the software environment
are available from our ftp server at UCL.  This includes the programming
language nC(a subset of C), algorithms (backpropagation, hopfield and
self-organising map) coded in nC and a graphical environment.  Anonymous ftp
details are given below.

The work carried out in Pygmalion has been continued into Galatea (ESPRIT II
5293).  Galatea is a three year project which started in January 1991, and
aims to produce a complete neural network system, from specific hardware
through various graphical software applications to industrial applications.
Information on Galatea can be obtained by mailing galatea@cs.ucl.ac.uk, or
obtaining documents from our information server.  To use this service, compose
an email to info-server@cs.ucl.ac.uk, with additional header lines "request:
galatea" and "topic: index". You will then obtain a list of currently
available documents.

Mike Hewetson
Galatea Neurocomputing

Retrieving the Pygmalion software via ftp
----------------------------------------- 

ftp to 128.16.5.31 (bells.cs.ucl.ac.uk), login anonymous, password your email
address. cd to pyggy.  The README and NOTICE files in that directory tells you
which files you need, and the Install document is available as
InstallDoc.tar.Z (after setting binary) Email pygbugs@cs.ucl.ac.uk if there
are any problems.
