{\rtf1\mac\deff2 {\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Chicago;}{\f2\froman New York;}{\f3\fswiss Geneva;}{\f4\fmodern Monaco;}{\f12\fnil Los Angeles;}{\f13\fnil Zapf Dingbats;}{\f16\fnil Palatino;}{\f20\froman Times;}{\f21\fswiss Helvetica;}{\f22\fmodern Courier;}
{\f23\ftech Symbol;}{\f242\fnil Sonata;}{\f2017\fnil Lubalin Graph;}{\f2052\fnil Zeal;}{\f4950\fnil TTYFont;}{\f5655\fnil GillSans BoldItalic;}{\f5656\fnil GillSans Bold;}{\f5657\fnil GillSans Italic;}{\f5658\fnil GillSans;}
{\f5659\fnil GillSans LightItalic;}{\f5660\fnil GillSans Light;}{\f12899\fnil AppleGaramond LtIt;}{\f12900\fnil AppleGaramond BkIt;}{\f12901\fnil AppleGaramond BdIt;}{\f12902\fnil AppleGaramond Lt;}{\f12903\fnil AppleGaramond Bk;}
{\f12904\fnil AppleGaramond Bd;}{\f13101\fnil Tekton Oblique;}{\f13102\fnil Tekton;}{\f14819\fnil BI LucidaSans BoldItalic;}{\f14820\fnil B LucidaSans Bold;}{\f14821\fnil I LucidaSans Italic;}{\f14822\fnil LucidaSans Roman;}
{\f14917\fnil BI Letter Gothic BoldSlanted;}{\f14918\fnil B Letter Gothic Bold;}{\f14919\fnil I Letter Gothic Slanted;}{\f14920\fnil Letter Gothic;}{\f15009\fnil GillSans ExtraBold;}{\f32525\fnil VT100;}}{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}{\stylesheet{\f21 \sbasedon222\snext0 Normal;}}\margl1440\margr1440\widowctrl\ftnbj\ftnrestart \sectd 
\linemod0\linex0\cols1\colsx240 {\footer \pard\plain \qr\tqc\tx4680\tqr\tx9360 \f21 {\fs18 \chpgn }{\fs18 \par 
}}\pard\plain \qc\tx380\tx700\tx1080 \f21 {\b\f16 \tab }{\b\f16\fs28 MCL FAQ\par 
}\pard \qc\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\b\f16 \tab (Frequently Asked Questions about Macintosh Common Lisp)\par 
}\pard \qc\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f16\fs20 \tab Updated: 22 June, 1994\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What is MCL?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Macintosh Common Lisp (MCL) is an object-oriented dynamic language (OODL) from Apple Computer, Inc. It implements the industry standard Common Lisp programming language and CLOS (as defined in }{\i\f20 
Common Lisp: The Language}{\f20 , second edition), and is fully integrated with the Macintosh family of personal computers.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 
MCL is a completely integrated development environment, including a fast incremental compiler which produces efficient native 680x0 code, a window-based debugger, a sourcecode stepper, a dynamic object inspector, a stack backtrace inspector, a programmable
 Macintosh-style emacs-like editor, online documentation, and an interactive interface toolkit. MCL provides both high-level object-oriented user interface class library and complete low-level access to the Macintosh Toolbox.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Using MCL, you can create a standalone double-clickable Macintosh application using less than 2MB of disk space which can be run with 2MB or more of memory.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What mailing lists are there for MCL users?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f22\fs20 info-mcl@cambridge.apple.com\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 This is a mailing list for MCL users. Many MCL users find this list to be a valuable resource for sharing information with other MCL users. If y
ou have any questions about MCL that aren't answered in this FAQ  (or tips, suggestions, or code to share) send them to the address above and often another user will be able to help you.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\tab You can read it in several ways.\par 
\tab \tab 1) Subscribe to info-mcl by sending mail to}{\f22\fs20  \par 
\tab \tab \tab info-mcl-request@cambridge.apple.com}{\f20 .\par 
\tab \tab 2) Read the "digest" version,}{\f22\fs20  info-mcl-digest}{\f20  (see below).\par 
\tab \tab 3) If you are on Applelink, join the }{\f22\fs20 INFO.MCL$}{\f20  group by sending a link to }{\f22\fs20 ST.CLAIR}{\f20 .\par 
\tab \tab 4) If you have access to netnews, join the }{\f22\fs20 comp.lang.lisp.mcl}{\f20  newsgroup.\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f22\fs20 info-mcl-digest@cambridge.apple.com\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 This is the same information as info-mcl, gathered into a single daily "digest" message. \par 
To subscribe, please send mail to }{\f22\fs20 info-mcl-digest-request@cambridge.apple.com.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f22\fs20 \par 
bug-mcl@cambridge.apple.com\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Send mail to bug-mcl if you need to contact the MCL team at Apple. We are committed to helping you, and we will try to respond as quickly as possible. \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 If you encounter a problem which you think is MCL's fault, please let us know by sending us a bug report
 including a detailed description of your machine configuration, and a description of your problem. If you can send a *small* fragment of code which reproduces the problem, that would also be of great help.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  Is there an internet ftp site for MCL?\par 
\tab Yes, connect to }{\f22\fs20 cambridge.apple.com}{\f20  by anonymous ftp.\par 
\par 
\tab Apple offers the following directories as a service to MCL users:\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx3020 {\f20 \tab }{\f22\fs20 /pub/MACL/}{\f20 \tab Code for MCL versions 1.3.2 and earlier.\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 /pub/MCL2/}{\f20 \tab Code for MCL versions 2.0 and later.\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 /pub/clim/}{\f20 \tab CLIM-related files\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 /pub/comp.lang.lisp/}{\f20 \tab Archives (rather out of date) of the comp.lang.lisp newsgroup.\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 /pub/dylan/}{\f20 \tab Information about Apple's other OODL, Dylan\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 /pub/mail-archive/}{\f20 \tab Archives of the info-mcl mailing list\par 
\par 
\tab The }{\f22\fs20 /pub/MCL2/}{\f20  directory has the following subdirectories:\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 contrib/}{\f20 \tab The MCL user-contributed software library\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 docs/}{\f20 \tab \tab Additional documentation about MCL\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 interfaces/}{\f20 \tab Interfaces to the Macintosh Toolbox\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 patches/}{\f20 \tab Patches to MCL 2.0\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx3020 {\f20 The}{\f22\fs20  /pub/MCL2/contrib/}{\f20  directory is a rich resource of useful code and extensions to
 MCL. It exists thanks to the generosity and community spirit of other MCL users. You are free to download files that are useful to you, as long as you heed all copyright notices and restrictions that may accompany them. Apple does not attempt to control t
he contents of the contrib library, all files are made available on an as-is basis. We do not modify contributions, and in most cases we do not test them or make any guarantees of their functionality or usefulness.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx3020 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx3020 {\f20 If you have some MCL-related code that y
ou'd like to share with other MCL users, Apple welcomes your contribution. Please upload it by anonymous ftp to the contrib directory, and send some mail to info-mcl announcing it. Apple cannot accept any code which is not authorized for public distributio
n by its author(s), so please make sure you include some notice with your code giving us permission to distribute it.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx3020 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx3020 {\f20 MCL versions 2.0 and greater include a CD-ROM containing portions of the contrib library as a service to our customers who do not have ft
p access. As with our ftp site, Apple does not modify or verify such code, and all ownership and copyright remains with the author. If you contribute code to our ftp site, please indicate whether you prefer to grant or deny Apple permission to include your
 code on future CD-ROMs.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab \par 
\bullet  What if I don't have ftp access?\par 
\par 
\tab You can receive files by email using our archive server. Send mail to\par 
\tab }{\f22\fs20 archive-server@cambridge.apple.com}{\f20  for more details.\par 
\par 
\tab Most files are also made available on the MCL CD-ROM, which is included with the purchase \par 
\tab of MCL.\par 
\par 
\bullet  Where can I get MCL support on Applelink?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Applelink users can subscribe to }{\f22\fs20 INFO.MCL$}{\f20 , which is a copy of the info-mcl list (see above).\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Applelink users can send mail to }{\f22\fs20 "info-mcl@cambridge.apple.com@internet#"}{\f20  (to reach users), or to }{\f22\fs20 "bug-mcl@cambridge.apple.com@internet#"}{\f20  (to reach the MCL team)\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
There are two areas on Applelink for discussions and files related to MCL:\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx720 {\f20 \tab Developer Support\par 
}\pard {\f20 \tab   Developer Talk\par 
\tab     Macintosh Development Tool Discussions\par 
\tab       Macintosh Common Lisp Discussion\par 
 \par 
\tab Developer Support\par 
\tab   Developer Services\par 
\tab     Development Platforms\par 
\tab       MCL related\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\par 
\bullet  Where can I buy MCL?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL is available from the Apple Programmers and Developers Association (APDA). \par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080\tx5760 {\f20 Macintosh Common Lisp v. 2.0.1\tab B0752LL/B -- $495.00\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab Includes 3 Mac disks, a CD-ROM, and two manuals.\par 
\par 
Macintosh Common Lisp v. 1.x to v. 2.0.1 Update\tab B0753LL/B -- $200.00\par 
\tab Includes 3 Mac disks, a CD-ROM, and two manuals.\par 
\tab Available to owners of pre-2.0 releases of MCL\par 
\par 
Macintosh Common Lisp v. 2.0 to v. 2.0.1 Upgrade\tab R0561LL/A -- $25.00\par 
\tab Includes 3 Mac disks and a CD-ROM, no manuals\par 
\tab Available to owners of MCL 2.0\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 To order MCL, and to get a free catalog featuring over 300 other Apple programming products, contact:\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\tab APDA\par 
\tab Apple Computer, Inc\par 
\tab P.O. Box 319 \par 
\tab Buffalo, NY 14207-0319\par 
\tab USA\par 
\par 
\tab 800-282-APDA (800-282-2732), toll-free in the USA\par 
\tab 800-637-0029, toll-free in Canada\par 
\tab 716-871-6555, international\par 
\tab 716-871-6511, fax\par 
\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx3460 {\f20 \tab APDA \tab (Applelink)\par 
\tab APDA@applelink.apple.com \tab (internet)\par 
\tab A.DEVELOPER3 \tab (GEnie)\par 
\tab 76666,2405 \tab (Compuserve)\par 
\tab APDA Sale \tab (America Online)\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL is also available from international APDA programs in many countries. Contact APDA or your local Apple office for more information.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 
MCL is also available from SFA (Software Frameworks Association, formerly called MADA), an independent nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting the use of object technology in software development. Several levels of membership are available. SFA membe
rs may purchase MCL at a special discount. For more information, please contact SFA at:\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\tab Software Frameworks Association\par 
\tab Suite 202-B\par 
\tab 10062 Miller Ave.\par 
\tab Cupertino, CA 95014\par 
\tab \par 
\tab 408-253-2765 (phone)\par 
\tab 408-253-2767 (fax)\par 
\tab FRAMEWORKS@applelink.apple.com (email)\par 
\par 
\bullet  Are site licenses and distribution licenses available?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Yes. For licensing information, please contact Apple Software Licensing at 408-974-4667, or email }{\f22\fs20 sw.license@applelink.apple.com}{\f20 .\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 You may distribute any quantity of commercial, double-clickable applications built with MCL for a one-time fee of $100 (or $10 for non-commercial use). For more details, please contact Apple Software Licensing.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What Macintosh configurations will MCL run on?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL 2.0 will work on any Macintosh with at least 4 MB of RAM and 6MB of disk storage, Macintosh System Software v. 6.0.4 or later; or A/UX 3.0. A CD-ROM drive is recommended.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
See the chart below to determine compatibility with specific Macintosh models.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What's the difference between MCL 2.01 and MCL 2.0?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL 2.01 is essentially a maintenance update to MCL 2.0. If you get the 2.01 ptable init and install the following patches into your copy of MCL 2.0, you will have an equivalent system:\par 
}\pard \li680\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab }{\f22\fs20 MCL 2.0p1, MCL 2.0p2, cyclone-cursor-patch,\par 
Centris-without-FPU, AUX-on-quadra\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \bullet  Where can I get patches from?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 On the Internet, you can get patches from the }{\f22\fs20 /pub/MCL2/patches/}{\f20  directory on the anonymous FTP server at }{\f22\fs20 cambridge.apple.com}{\f20 )\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
On Applelink, patches are available on the MCL forums (see above)\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Patches for MCL are also distributed on the monthly Developer\rquote s CD-ROM, available by subscription from APDA (see above for ordering information).\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What's with the ptable init, anyways?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 
The ptable init initializes the memory management hardware (if present) in such a way that MCL can use it to make ephemeral garbage collection (EGC) more efficient.  Since it deals at a very low level with both the hardware and the operating system, it is 
vulnerable to minor changes when a new Macintosh model or operating system version is released.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL will always run without the ptable init.  In most configur
ations, just running the ptable init will slow down all memory accesses until you restart without it. The slowdown isn't very large, but  you will have to decide whether or not the benefit of improved EGC performance is worth the cost, depending upon your 
exact usage of MCL and your Mac.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 If your ptable init comes up with a big \ldblquote X\rdblquote 
 through it while booting, that means it was not installed. This will not have any bad effect; ptable is simply being ignored. Usually this either because you have a machine with no PMMU, or you have virtual memory turned on. \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\tab You should consider using the ptable init if all of the following are true:\par 
\tab \tab \bullet  Your Macintosh's CPU is an 040, 030, or 020 (with a PMMU installed), and\par 
\tab \tab \bullet  You are not running with System 7's virtual memory turned on, and\par 
\tab \tab \bullet  You prefer to run MCL with EGC enabled\par 
}\pard {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340 {\f20 Using ptable on an 040 machine will give you slightly better EGC performance, at the expense of slightly worse overall machine performance, so Quadra owners may prefer not to use ptable. The ptab
le init has a much larger effect on 68030 machines, greatly speeding up MCL when you use EGC, so it is recommended for 030 owners who use EGC.\par 
}\pard \li340 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360 {\f20 For those of you who insist on even gorier details, here they are: \par 
}\pard \li360 {\f20 
The ptable init changes the MMU page size to 4K. If MCL notices that the page size is 4K or 8K it will use the MMU as a write barrier so that ephemeral garbage collections (EGC's) will have less work to do in determining which pages of older generations ne
ed to be walked looking for pointers into th
e generation being GC'd. This speeds up EGC considerably. Thus, ptable is unnecessary if you don't use the EGC. 68040 macs default to an 8K page size, so you'll get MMU assistance even without ptable, though ptable will slightly speed up MCL's EGC at the e
xpense of slightly slowing down the entire machine. 68030 Macs default to very large page sizes (1M or larger!). Thus, MCL's EGC gets no hardware support unless the ptable init is installed.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20\fs20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \bullet  Which version of MCL runs on what hardware?\par 
}\pard \li500\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\trowd \trqc\trgaph80\trleft-80 \clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx4600\clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx8920\pard \intbl {\b\f20 Macintosh\cell 
}\pard \intbl {\b\f20 Recommended MCL version\cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f20 \row }\trowd \trqc\trgaph80\trleft-80 \clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx4600\clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb
\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx8920\pard \intbl {\f20 Mac Plus, SE, Portable\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 MCL 2.0 or later \par 
(ptable init will be ignored)\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \intbl {\f20 SE30, Classic, Classic II, Color Classic\par 
LC, LCII, LCIII, LC 520\par 
II, IIx, IIci, IIcx, IIfx\par 
Quadra 700, 900, 950, 800\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 MCL 2.0 or later \par 
ptable init 2.0 or later\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \intbl {\f20 Powerbook Duo 210, 230\par 
Powerbook 140, 145, 160, 165c, 180, 180c\par 
IIvi, IIvx\par 
Centris 650 (with FPU)\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 MCL 2.0 or later \par 
ptable init 2.01 or later\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\trowd \trqc\trgaph80\trleft-80 \clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx4600\clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair 
\clshdng0\cellx8920\pard \intbl {\f20 Centris 610, 650 (with no FPU)\par 
Quadra 660av, 840av\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 MCL 2.01 or later \par 
ptable init 2.01 or later\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360 {\f20 The 2.01 version of the ptable init is available for anonymous FTP from }{\f22\fs20 cambridge.apple.com:/pub/mcl2/patches/ptable-2.01.hqx.\par 
}\pard {\f22\fs20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \bullet  Does MCL run on PowerPC?\par 
\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL 2.01 does not run in native mode on PowerPC, nor does it generate native mode applications.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard {\f20 MCL 2.01 runs under emulation on PowerPC Macs, if you do two things:\par 
\tab 1) You don\rquote t use Apple\rquote s Virtual Memory (VM is ok with the patch below), and \par 
\tab 2) You turn off the \ldblquote Modern Memory Manager\rdblquote  in the Memory control panel. \par 
}\pard {\f20 The PPC\rquote s 68K emulator returns a hitherto-unheard-of MMU type which the released MCL doesn\rquote t handle.\par 
}\pard {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 There is now a patch to make it run under VM. It\rquote s available for anonymous ftp as\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f22\fs20 \tab cambridge.apple.com:/pub/mcl2/patches/MMU5-for-PowerMac}{\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 To make it run under the modern memory manager will require some further investigation. Apple is committed to making sure MCL 2.0.1 runs smoothly on PowerPC, at least under the 68K emulation mode.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  Does MCL run on Macs with third-party accelerator cards?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li540 {\f20 Note that "works" or "does not work" below means "MCL runs with the board installed and enabled" or "MCL crashes with the board installed and enabled", respectively.\par 
}\pard \li540 {\f20 \par 
}\trowd \trqc\trgaph80\trleft-80 \clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx3160\clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx8920\pard \intbl {\f20 
Daystar Turbo '040 33 MHz\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 works on IIci with MMU4-for-IIci patch.\par 
Should work on other machines, but this is untested.\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\trowd \trqc\trgaph80\trleft-80 \clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx3160\clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb
\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx8920\pard \intbl {\f20 Daystar Power Cache 50\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 Works on a IIci.\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \intbl {\f20 Radius Rocket 25\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 
Should work on IIci with MMU4-for-IIci patch, but this is untested. Does not work with RocketShare on any machine, but will work with RocketWare.\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \intbl {\f20 Radius Rocket 25i\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 
Centris-without-FPU patch will make it work, but this is untested. Also needs MMU4-for-IIci patch on a IIci.\par 
}\pard \intbl {\f20 Again, will work with RocketWare, but not RocketShare.\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \intbl {\f20 Radius Rocket 33\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 Seems to work on IIci. Again, will work with RocketWare, but not RocketShare.\cell 
}\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard \intbl {\f20 Tokamac 25Mhz \cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 Doesn't work on IIci. Should work with MMU4-for-IIci patch, though this is not tested.\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\trowd \trqc\trgaph80\trleft-80 \clbrdrt\brdrhair 
\clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx3160\clbrdrt\brdrhair \clbrdrl\brdrhair \clbrdrb\brdrhair \clbrdrr\brdrhair \clshdng0\cellx8920\pard \intbl {\f20 RasterOps 24XLTV\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20 Does not work on Mac II.\cell 
}\pard \intbl {\f20 \row }\pard {\f20\fs20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20\fs20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \bullet  Is MCL code portable to other platforms?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 MCL complies with the current industry standard for Common Lisp, as defined in "Common Lisp: The Language", second edition, by Gu
y Steele. This should guarantee a high degree of compatibility with Common Lisp implementations on many other platforms.\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 This specification changed somewhat between the first and second editions; please consult the second edition for descriptions of the changes.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What is CLIM?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 
The Common Lisp Interface Manager (CLIM) is a cross-platform User Interface toolkit, which allows you to create user interfaces for Lisp applications that will run on Macintosh, Windows, Motif (X Windows), and Symbolics Lisp Machi
nes. For more information about CLIM, please send mail to}{\f22\fs20  clim-request@bbn.com}{\f20 , or contact Lucid at:\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\tab Lucid, Inc. \par 
\tab 707 Laurel Street,\par 
\tab Menlo Park, CA 94025 U.S.A\par 
\tab 800-843-4204, or 415-329-8400\par 
\tab 415-329-8480 (fax)\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab }{\f22\fs20 sales@lucid.com\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What do CCL and MACL stand for?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li360 {\f20 MCL was originally developed by a small company in Cambridge, Mass. called Coral Software, under the name \ldblquote Coral Common Lisp\rdblquote 
 (CCL). Later, Coral entered a marketing agreement with Franz, Inc., a major vendor of unix-based Lisps, to sell the Coral product under the name \ldblquote Allegro Common Lisp\rdblquote .\par 
}\pard \li360 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li360 {\f20 In 1988, Apple Computer purchased Coral and its assets, and the product was renamed to be \ldblquote Macintosh Allegro Common Lisp\rdblquote  (MACL). In 1992, the 2.0 version of the product was renamed to Macintosh Common Lisp, or MCL.
\par 
}\pard {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \bullet  Where can I get more information about Common Lisp?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Appendix F of the MCL 2.0 manual ("}{\i\f20 For more information}{\f20 ") contains many useful references, including a bibliography of popular Common Lisp textbooks.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 The }{\f22\fs20 comp.lang.lisp}{\f20  newsgroup is another excellent source of information about Common Lisp and other lisp dialects. \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 A comprehensive "}{\i\f20 Lisp FAQ}{\f20 
" document is periodically posted to comp.lang.lisp. This contains answers to questions programmers often ask, including questions of style, usage, and common bugs. It also includes a comprehensive guide to lisp vendors and implementations on various platf
orms. A copy of this is also included on the MCL cd-rom in the folder "}{\f22\fs20 Mail Archives & Other Docs:Answers to Freq Asked Questions}{\f20 "\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 The latest version is always available by anonymous ftp from CMU and Thinking Machines. To get the CMU library, ftp to }{\f22\fs20 cs.cmu.edu}{\f20 , and type\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab     }{\f22\fs20 cd /afs/cs.cmu.edu/user/mkant/Public/Lisp-Utilities/\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 
Note: you must cd to this directory in one command, as intermediate directories are protected from anonymous ftp access. This directory contains the FAQ document, as well as a large collection of other Common Lisp code, utilities, and documentation.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
The Thinking Machines site is at }{\f22\fs20 ftp.think.com:/public/think/lisp/}{\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\bullet  What's the future direction for MCL?\par 
\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 
Apple is continuing to enhance and support MCL. A maintenance release, MCL 2.01, is now available, primarily to extend MCL support to the latest Macintosh machines, such as the Centris 610, the Centris 660av, and the Quadra 840av.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 We are currently planning future releases of MCL to provide a variety of enhancements, including PowerPC support. We have not announced future products at this time.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\b\f20\fs28 Programming questions\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Many programming questions about Common Lisp are answered in the Lisp FAQ (see above). This section is specifically for MCL.\par 
}\pard \tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard {\f20 \bullet  Even though my screen is set to 256/thousands/millions of colors, I only seem to get 8 different colors in my MCL windows. Why ?\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 This is a very frequently-asked question. Windows created by MCL default to the original Macintosh Quickdraw routines, which only support 8 colors (6 plus black and white). In order to get the full spectrum you must:
\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab \bullet  Be running on a machine with 32bit quickdraw. (System 7 provides this, or get a special\par 
\tab \tab system extension for System 6)\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \tab \bullet  Specify }{\f22 :color-p t}{\f20  when creating windows. One way to do this is\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f22 \tab \tab (make-instance \rquote window :color-p t)\par 
}{\f20 \par 
\tab \tab Another approach is to make this a default for your custom window class:\par 
}{\f22 \tab (defclass my-window (window)\par 
\tab \tab (...)\par 
\tab \tab (:default-initargs :color-p t ...))\par 
\par 
}\pard {\f20 \bullet  I\rquote ve created an application, but it\rquote s not handling high-level events (and thus Apple events). What should I do?\par 
}\pard {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 It is likely that your toplevel-function neglected to call }{\f22 (startup-finished)}{\f20 , a new \ldblquote feature\rdblquote  of MCL 2.0.1 that is do
cumented in the release notes. This feature makes it possible to print from the Finder when printing requires launching the MCL app.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
Here is the relevant section of the release notes:\par 
\par 
}{\b\f20 New startup housekeeping}{\f20 \par 
\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 In order to make printing from the Finder work correctly, high level events are disabled until MCL's startup code enables them. If you call }{\f22 SAVE-APPLICATION}{\f20  and specify a value for the }{\f22 
:TOPLEVEL-FUNCTION}{\f20  parameter, your toplevel function must evaluate the following form (either directly, or indirectly via a call to }{\f22 CCL::STARTUP-CCL}{\f20 ):\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
  }{\f22 (startup-finished)}{\f20 \par 
\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 You should do this after processing the }{\f22 (FINDER-PARAMETERS)}{\f20 . If you neglect the call to }{\f22 STARTUP-FINISHED}{\f20 , your application will not receive any high level events (e.g. AppleEvents).\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard {\f20 \bullet  I\rquote m having a lot of troubles writing TCP/IP code.\par 
\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 Try turning off the }{\f22 :async}{\f20  bit in the }{\f22 #_control}{\f20  trap in }{\f22 %tcp-control}{\f20  and see if that helps. \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
}\pard {\f20 \bullet  }{\f22 encode-universal-time}{\f20  returns bizarre (too large) values when called with a time zone supplied.\par 
}\pard {\f20 \par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 This is a known bug. MCL neglected to initialize the }{\f22 era}{\f20  field in the }{\f22 longDateRec}{\f20  record passed to }{\f22 #_LongDate2Secs}{\f20 . The }{\f22 leap-year-patch}{\f20  from our ftp site
 fixes this bug and another obscure bug with }{\f22 encode-universal-time}{\f20  near leap years.\par 
}\pard \li340\tx380\tx700\tx1080 {\f20 \par 
\par 
}}