From:         Ernest Perez <EPEREZ@UTDALLAS>
Subject:      Human-Computer Interface tech reports available
 
The following tech report list is from the Human-Computer Interaction Lab at
the University of Maryland. They have been VERY active in the areas of
user-interface design, menu design, mental modelling, hypertext traversal,
mouse/touchscreen/cursor manipulation, etc.
 
This is a knockout resource on user-interface topics: I thought this would be
of great interest to PACS-L subscribers; next-generation OPACS, etc.
 
Got the list from alt.hypertext, forwarding with the permission of the author.
 
Ernest Perez
Bitnet: eperez@utdallas
Internet: eperez@utdallas.edu
The usual disclaimer: No, it wasn't me; somebody must have used my password
---------------------forwarded message follows---------------------
Date: 13 Aug 92 21:54:08 GMT
From: carm@cs.umd.edu (Richard Chimera)
Organization: U of Maryland, Dept. of Computer Science, Coll. Pk., MD 20742
Subject: Re: refs for linear-nonlin trans?
 
We at the Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory at the University of
Maryland have done many studies about hypertext authoring, transformation,
and analysis.  Though we've stopped most of this research a couple years
ago, I'm sure our reports are still very applicable.  Below is our
entire list of tech reports, feel free to look it over and request the
tech reports that interest you.  Just searching for "hyper" may not give
you all the relevant reports.....
 
Also, please follow the contact info at the end of the list.
 
Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory Publication List
 
A. V. Williams Building, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742
 
1992
 
92-01   Williamson, C., Shneiderman, B. (Jan. 1992), The dynamic
HomeFinder:  evaluating dynamic queries in a real-estate information
exploration system, Technical Report CAR-TR-602, CS-TR-2819.
 
92-02   Sears, A. (Jan. 1992), Layout appropriateness:  a metric for
user interface evaluation, Technical Report CAR-TR-603, CS-TR-2823.
 
1991
 
91-01   Chimera, R., Wolman, K., Mark, S., Shneiderman B. (Feb. 1991),
Evaluation of three interfaces for browsing hierarchical tables of
contents, Technical Report CAR-TR-539, CS-TR-2620.
 
91-02   Shneiderman, B., (March 1991), Touch screens now offer
compelling uses, IEEE Software 8, 2, (March 1991), 93-94, 107.
 
91-03   Shneiderman, B. (March 1991), Tree visualization with tree
maps: a 2-d space-filling approach, ACM Transactions on Graphics.
Technical Report CAR-TR-548, CS-TR-2645.
 
91-04   Botafogo, R., Shneiderman, B. (April 1991), Identifying
aggregates in hypertext structures, Proceedings of Hypertext `91, ACM,
New York. Technical Report CAR-TR-550, CS-TR-2650.
 
91-05   Keil-Slawik, R., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B.(April 1991),
Remote direct manipulation: a case study of a telemedicine workstation,
Human Aspects in Computing:  Design and Use of Interactive Systems and
Information Management, Bullinger H.-J. Ed., (Proc. of the 4th Int.
Conf. on HCI, Stuttgart, Sept. 91). Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1006-1011.
Technical Report CAR-TR-551, CS-TR-2655.
 
91-06   Johnson, B., Shneiderman, B. (April 1991), Tree map: a
space-filling approach to the visualization of hierarchical information
structures, Proc. of the 2nd International IEEE Visualization
Conference, San Diego, October 1991. Technical Report CAR-TR-552,
CS-TR-2657.
 
91-07   Sears, A., Revis, D., Swatski, J., Crittenden, R., Shneiderman
B. (April 1991),  Investigating touchscreen typing: the effect of
keyboard size on typing speed, Technical Report CAR-TR-553,
CS-TR-2662.
 
91-08   Norman, K. (1991), Models of mind and machines, information
flow and control between humans and computers, Advances in Computers,
M. Yovits, Ed., Vol. 32, Academic Press Inc., NY, NY (1991), 201-254.
 
91-09   Weiland, W., Shneiderman, B. (July 1991), A graphical query
interface based on aggregation/generalization hierarchies, Technical
Report CAR-TR-562, CS-TR-2702.
 
91-10   Shneiderman, B. (July 1991), Visual user interfaces for
information exploration, 1991 ASIS Proc..  Technical Report CAR-TR-577,
CS-TR-2748.
 
91-11   Ahlberg, C., Williamson, C., Shneiderman, B. (Sept 1991),
Dynamic queries for information exploration:  an implemention and
evaluation, to appear in ACM Proc. CHI T92, Monteray, CA, May
2-9,1992.  Technical Report CAR-TR-584, CS-TR-2763.
 
91-12   Plaisant, C., Sears (Sept. 1991), A. Touchscreen interfaces for
flexible alphanumeric data entry, Technical Report CAR-TR-585,
CS-TR-2764.
 
91-13   Shneiderman, B.,Williamson, C., Ahlberg, C.(Sept. 1991),
Dynamic queries: database searching by direct manipulation, Video and
abstract paper.
 
91-14   Chimera, R. (October 1991), Value bars:  an information
visualization and navigation tool for multi-attribute listings and
tables, Technical Report CAR-RTR 589, CS-TR 2773.
 
1990
 
90-01   Sears, A., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B. (June 1990),  A new
era for high-precision touchscreens, To appear in Advances in
Human-Computer Interaction, Hartson, R. and Hix, D. Ed., Vol.3, Ablex
Publ., NJ.  Technical Report CAR-TR-506, CS-TR-2487.
 
90-02   Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., Botafogo, R., Hopkins, D.,
Weiland, W. (revised May 1991), Designing to facilitate browsing: a
look back at the Hyperties work station browser, Hypermedia, Vol. 3, #2
1991, 101-117.  Based on Technical Report CAR-TR-494, CS-TR-2433 Visual
engagement and low cognitive load in browsing hypertext.
 
90-03   Lifshitz, J., Shneiderman, B. (March 1990), Window control
strategies for hypertext traversal: An empirical study, Proc. 29th
Annual ACM DC Technical Symposium (June 1991) DC Chapter of the ACM,
Washington, DC, 121-132.  Technical Report CAR-TR-475, CS-TR-2356.
 
90-04   Butler, S. (June 1990), The effect of method of instruction and
spatial visualization ability on the subsequent navigation of a
hierarchical database, Technical Report CAR-TR-488, CS-TR-2398.
 
90-05   Jones, T., Shneiderman, B. (July 1990), Examining usability for
a training-oriented hypertext:  can hyper-activity be good?, Electronic
Publishing, Vol. 3(4) (Nov. 1990) 207-225.  Technical Report
CAR-TR-509, CS-TR-2499.
 
90-06   Sears, A. (revised March 1991),  Improving touchscreen
keyboards:  design issues and a comparison with other devices,
Interacting with Computers, vol. 3, no. 3 (1991) 253-269.  Technical
Report CAR-TR-515, CS-TR-2536.
 
90-07   Shneiderman B. (Sept. 1990), Human values and the future of
technology:  a declaration of responsibility, Keynote address for the
ACM SIGCAS 90 Conference: Computers and the Quality of Life.  Also
SIGCHI Bulletin (Jan. 1991), ACM New York.
 
90-08   Plaisant, C., Wallace D. (Nov. 1990), Touchscreen toggle
switches: push or slide?  Design issues and usability study, Technical
report CAR-TR-521, CS-TR-2557.
 
90-09   Plaisant, C.(Nov. 1990), Guide to opportunities in volunteer
archaeology - case study of the use of a hypertext system in a museum
exhibit, Hypertext/Hypermedia Handbook, Berk E.& Devlin, J., eds,
McGraw-Hill Publ. (1991), 498-505.  Technical Report CAR-TR-523,
CS-TR-2559.
 
90-10   Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B., Battaglia J. (Nov. 1990),
Scheduling home-control devices: a case study of the transition from
the research project to a product, Human Factors in Practice, Dec.
1990, 7-12. Santa-Monica, CA:  Computer Systems Technical Group, Human
Factors Society.  Technical report CAR-TR-522, CS-TR-2558.
 
90-11   Botafogo, R., Rivlin, E., Shneiderman, B. (revised Oct 1991),
Structural analysis of hypertexts:  identifying hierarchies and useful
metrics, ACM Transactions on Information Systems `91 (in press).
Technical report CAR-TR-526, CS-TR-2574.
 
90-12   Shneiderman, B. (Oct. 1990), Protecting rights in user
interface designs, ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, Oct. 1990.  Excerpt of this
paper also appeared as: Intellectual protection for user interfaces?
Communication of the ACM, 34, 4. (April 1991) 13-14.
 
90-13   Norman, K.,  (Summer 1990), The electronic teaching theater:
interactive hypermedia and mental models of the classroom, Current
Psychology: Research & Reviews, Summer 90, Vol. 9, No. 2, 141-161.
 
1989
 
89-01   Shneiderman, B. (1989), Reflections on authoring, editing, and
managing hypertext, The Society of Text, Barrett, Ed., MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, (1989), 115-131.  Technical Report CAR-TR-410,
CS-TR-2160.
 
89-02   Norman, K. L., Butler, S. A., (Jan. 1989), Search by
uncertainty:  menu selection by target probability, Technical Report
CS-TR-2230, CAR-TR-432.
 
89-03   Sears, A., Kochavy, Y., Shneiderman, B. (1989), Touchscreen
field specification for public access database queries:  let your
fingers do the walking,  Proc. of the ACM Computer Science Conference
T90 (Feb. 1990) 1-7.
 
89-04   Seabrook, R., Shneiderman, B. (April 1989), The user interface
in a hypertext, multi-window program browser, Interacting with
Computers  1(3) (1989), 299-337.  Technical Report CS-TR-2237,
CAR-TR-437.
 
89-05   Shneiderman, B. (April 1989), A nonanthropomorphic style
guide:  overcoming the humpty dumpty syndrome, The Computing Teacher,
16(7), (1989), 5.
 
89-06   Shneiderman, B., Kearsley, G. (1989), Hypertext Hands-On!,
Addison-Wesley Publ., Reading, MA, 192 pages + 2 PC disks.
 
89-07   Mitchell, J., Shneiderman, B. (Apr. 1989), Dynamic versus
static menus:  an exploratory comparison, ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, 20(4),
(1989), 33-37.
 
89-08   Shneiderman, B., Brethauer, D., Plaisant, C., Potter, R. (May
1989), Evaluating three museum installations of a hypertext, Journal of
the American Society for Information Science, 40(3), 172-182.
 
89-09   Jones, T. (May 1989), Incidental learning during information
retrieval:  a hypertext experiment, Proc. International Conference on
Computer-Assisted Learning, H. Mauser, Ed., Dallas, TX, Springer
Verlag, Berlin. 235-253.
 
89-10   Hobbs, D. J., Shneiderman, B. (1989), Design, implementation,
and evaluation of automatic spelling correction for UNIX commands,
Technical Report CAR-TR-440, CS-TR-2243.
 
89-11   Shneiderman, B. (1989), Intelligent interfaces:  from fantasy
to fact, Proc. IFIP 11th World Computer Congress  (San Francisco, CA
Aug. 28-Sept. 1, 1989).
 
89-12   Weiland, W. J., Shneiderman, B. (Aug. 1989), Interactive
graphics interfaces in hypertext systems, Proc. 28th Annual ACM DC
Technical Symposium, 23-28.  Technical Report CAR-TR-449, CS-TR-2267.
 
89-13   Shneiderman, B. (Sept. 1989), Future directions for
human-computer interaction, Proc. Human-Computer Interaction '89
(Boston, Sept. 18-22, 1989).  Also Designing and Using Human-Computer
Interfaces and Knowledge Baed Systems, Salvendy, G. and Smith, M. J.
Eds., Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam, Netherlands.  Also
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction (1990) 2, (1)
73-90.  Technical Report  CAR-TR-436, CS-TR-2235.
 
89-14   Plaisant, C. (May 1989), Semi-automatic conversion to a
hypertext database, The case study of the NCR management college course
catalog.
 
89-15   Furuta, R., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B. (May 1989), A
spectrum of automatic hypertext constructions, Hypermedia, (1) 2,
(1989), 179-195.  Technical Report, CS-TR-2253, CAR-TR-443.
 
89-16   Faloutsos, C., Lee, R., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B. (June
1989), Incorporating string search in a hypertext system:  user
interface and signature file design issues, Hypermedia , Vol. 2 #3
1990, 183-200.  Technical Report, CS-TR-2266, CAR-TR-448.
 
89-17   Sears, A., Shneiderman, B. (June 1989), High precision
touchscreens:  design strategies and comparisons with a mouse,
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 34, 4, April 1991,
593-613.  Technical Report CS-TR-2268, CAR-TR-450.
 
89-18   Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B. (revised Feb.1991), Scheduling
home control devices: design issues and usability evaluation of four
touchscreen interfaces, To appear in the International Journal of
Man-Machine Studies.  Technical Report, CS-TR-2352, CAR-TR-472.
 
89-19   Koivunen, Marja-Riitta (Sept. 1989), WSE:  an environment for
exploring window strategies, Proc. of EurographicsU90  (North-Holland
1990), pp. 495-506.  Technical Report CS-TR-2353, CAR-TR-473.
 
89-20   Furuta, R., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B. (Dec.1989),
Automatically transforming regularly structured linear documents into
hypertext, Electronic Publishing - Origination, Dissemination and
Design 2, 4 (1990), 211-229.
 
88-01   Marchionini, G., Shneiderman, B. (Jan. 1988), Finding facts vs.
browsing knowledge in hypertext systems, IEEE Computer, 21, #1, 70-80.
 
88-02   Wang, X., Liebscher, P., Marchionini, G. (Jan. 1988), Improving
information seeking performance in hypertext:  roles of display format
and search strategy, Technical Report CAR-TR-353, CS-TR-2006.
 
88-03   Chin, J. P., Norman, K. L (June 1988), Declarative and
procedural knowledge in menu systems:  diagramming cognitive maps of
phone and ATM commands, Technical Report CAR-TR-366, CS-TR-2053.
 
88-04   Potter, R.L., Weldon, L.J., Shneiderman, B., (May 1988),
Improving the accuracy of touch screens:  an experimental evaluation of
three strategies, Proc. of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems  (CHI T88)  (Washington, DC 1988), 27-32.
 
88-05   Kreitzberg, C., Shneiderman, B. (1988), Restructuring knowledge
for an electronic encyclopedia, Proc. International Ergonomics
Association 10th Congress  (Sydney, Australia Aug. 1-5, 1988).
 
88-06   Shneiderman, B. (1988), We can design better user interfaces:
a review of human- computer interaction styles, Proc. International
Ergonomics Association 10th Congress 31, 5  (Sydney, Australia Aug.
1-5, 1988), 699-710.
 
88-07   Norman, K. L., Mantel, W., Wallace, D. F. (Oct. 1988), User's
guide to the menu selection prototyping system, Technical Report
CAR-TR-393, CS-TR-2114.
 
88-08   Chin, J. P. (Oct. 1988), A dynamic user adaptable menu system:
linking it all together, Technical Report CAR-TR-396, CS-TR-2120.
 
88-09   Potter, R., Berman, M., Shneiderman, B. (Nov. 1988), An
experimental evaluation of three touchscreen strategies within a
hypertext database, International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction, 1(1) (1989), 41-52.  Technical Report CAR-TR-405,
CS-TR-2141.
 
88-10   Wallace, W. F., Norman, K. L., Plaisant, C. (Sept. 1988), The
american voice and robotics "guardian" system:  a case study in user
interface usability evaluation, Technical Report CAR-TR-392,
CS-TR-2113.
 
 
1987
 
87-01   Shneiderman, B. (1987), User interface design for the hyperties
electronic encyclopedia, Proc. Hypertext '87, 199-205.
 
87-02   Mills, C.B., Weldon, L.J. (1987), Reading text from computer
screens, ACM Computing Surveys, 19(4), 329-358.
 
87-03   Shneiderman, B. (Feb. 1987), Design guidebook for interaction
styles:  a taxonomy, rule-base, and some options, To appear in Human
Factors for Information Usability.  Technical Report CAR-TR-265,
CS-TR-1776.
 
87-04   Margono, S., Shneiderman, B. (June 1987), A study of file
manipulation by novices using commands vs. direct manipulation, 26th
Annual Technical Symposium, Washington, DC Chapter of the ACM, 154-159,
Technical Report CAR-TR-264, CS-TR-1775.
 
87-05   Chin, J. (July 1987), Top-down and bottom-up processes in
sorting computer menu system commands, Technical Report  CAR-TR-303,
CS-TR-1879.
 
87-06   Chin, J., Norman, K., Shneiderman, B. (July 1987), Subjective
user evaluation of CF Pascal programming tools, Technical Report
CAR-TR-304, CS-TR-1880.
 
87-07   Lifshitz, K., Shneiderman, B. (July 1987), Window control
strategies for on-line text traversal (unpublished), Computer Science
Internal Report.
 
87-08   Shneiderman, B. (Aug. 1987), User interface design and
evaluation for an electronic encyclopedia, Proc. of the 2nd
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction  (Honolulu, HI
Aug. 1987).  Also G. Salvendy, Ed., Cognitive Engineering in the Design
of Human-Computer Interaction and Expert Systems, Elsevier, (1987),
207-223, Technical Report CAR-TR-280, CS-TR-1819.
 
87-09   Ostroff, D., Shneiderman, B. (Sept. 1987), Selection devices
for users of an electronic encyclopedia:  an empirical comparison of
four possibilities, Information Processing & Management, Vol. 24, No.
6, 665-680, Technical Report CAR-TR-321, CS-TR-1910.
 
87-10   Callahan, J., Hopkins, D., Weiser, M., Shneiderman, B. (Sept.
1987), An empirical comparison of pie vs. linear menus, Proc. of ACM
CHI `88 Conference.  Technical Report CS-TR-1919.
 
87-11   Chin, J. P., Diehl, V. A, Norman, K. (Sept. 1987), Development
of an instrument measuring user satisfaction of the human-computer
interface, Proc. ACM CHI '88, 213-218, Technical Report CAR-TR-328,
CS-TR-1926.
 
87-12   Norman, K., Chin, J. P. (Oct. 1987), The menu metaphor:  food
for thought, Behavior and Information Technology, 8, 125-134.
Technical Report CAR-TR-334, CS-TR-1944.
 
87-13   Wallace, D., Anderson, N., Shneiderman, B. (Oct. 1987), Time
stress effects on two menu selection systems, Proc. of the 31st Annual
Meeting - Human Factors Society, (NY, NY).
 
87-14   Norman, K., Schwartz, J. (1987), Memory for hierarchical
menus:  effects of study mode, Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society ,
25, 163-166.
 
1986
 
86-01   Ewing, J., Mehrabanzad, S., Sheck, S., Ostroff, D.,
Shneiderman, B. (Jan. 1986), An experimental comparison of a mouse and
arrow-jump keys for an interactive encyclopedia, International Journal
of Man-Machine Studies, 24, 1, 29-45.
 
86-02   Shneiderman, B. (Feb. 1986), Empirical studies of programmers:
the territory, paths, and destinations, Keynote address for workshop
Empirical Studies of Programmers, E. Soloway and R. Iyengar, Eds.,
Ablex Publishers, Norwood, NJ, June 1986, 1-12.  Technical Report
CAR-TR-187, CS-TR-1623.
 
86-03   Shneiderman, B. (March 1986), Designing menu selection systems,
Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 37, 2, 57-70.
 
86-04   Koved, L., Shneiderman, B. (April 1986), Embedded menus:
selecting items in context, Communications of the ACM 29, 4, 312-318.
Also (August 13, 1985), IBM Research Report RC 11310. Reprinted in
Hebrew in Maaseh-Hoshev.
 
86-05   Ostroff, D. M. (May 1986), Selection systems:  interactive
devices and strategies, Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of
Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 161 pages
(see 87-09 condensed published version).
 
86-06   Shneiderman, B., Shafer, P., Simon, R., Weldon, L. (May 1986),
Display strategies for program browsing:  concepts and an experiment,
IEEE Software 3, 3, March 1986, 7-15.  Technical Report CAR-TR-192,
CS-TR-1635.
 
86-07   Norman, K., Weldon, L., Shneiderman, B. (Aug. 1986), Cognitive
layouts of windows and multiple screens for user interfaces,
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 25, 229-248, Technical
Report CAR-TR-123, CS-TR-1498.
 
86-08   Reisel, J., Shneiderman, B. (Oct. 1986), Is bigger better?,
Ergonomic and Stress Aspects of Work with Computers, G. Salvendy, S. L.
Sauter, and J. J. Hurrell, Jr., Eds., Elsevier, Aug. 1987, 113-122.
Technical Report CAR-TR-231, CS-TR-1722.
 
86-09   Morariu, J., Shneiderman, B. (Nov. 1986), Design and research
on The Interactive Encyclopedia System (TIES), Proc. 29th Conference of
the Association for the Development  of Computer Based Instructional
Systems, 19-21.
 
86-10   Baroff, J., Simon, R., Gilman, F., Shneiderman, B. (Dec. 1986),
Direct manipulation user interfaces for expert systems, Expert
Systems:  The User Interface, J. Hendler, Ed., Ablex Publishers,
Norwood, NJ, 1987, 101-127.  Technical Report CAR-TR-244, CS-TR-1745.
 
86-11   Laverson, A., Norman, K., Shneiderman, B. (1986), An evaluation
of jump-ahead techniques for frequent menu users, 1987, Behaviour and
Information Technology, 6, 2, 97-108.  Technical Report CAR-TR-168,
CS-TR-1591.
 
1985
 
85-01   Weldon, L.J., Mills, C.B., Koved, L., Shneiderman, B. (1985),
The structure of information in online and paper technical manuals,
Proc. Human Factors Society - 29th Annual Conference  (Santa Monica,
CA), 1110-1113.
 
85-02   Parton, D., Huffman, K., Pridgen, P., Norman, K., Shneiderman,
B. (1985), Learning a menu selection tree:  training methods compared,
Behaviour and Information Technology  4, 2, 81-91.
 
85-03   Schwartz, J., Norman, K., Shneiderman, B. (March 1985),
Performance on content free menus as a function of study method,
(Submitted for publication).  Technical Report CAR-TR-110, CS-TR-1477.
 
85-04   Koved, L. (July 1985), Restructuring textual information for
online retrieval, Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of Computer
Science, University of Maryland Technical report 1529, CAR-TR-133.
 
 1984
 
84-01   Norman, K., Schwartz, J., Shneiderman, B. (May 1984), Memory
for menus:  effects of study mode, Technical Report CAR-TR-69,
CS-TR-1412.
 
 
 
 
Due to the potentially large volume of requests, we limit the number of
free copies that we send to five per request. For any additional
reports that you would like, we charge $5 per copy payable in the form
of a check to University of Maryland.  Send email requests to
tcasey@cs.umd.edu.
 
--
  Richard "carm" Chimera, Lab Manager   | A population of sheep will eventually
  Human Computer Interaction Lab, U Md. | beget a government of wolves.
  A.V. Williams Bldg                    |   -- William Sloan Coffin
  College Park, MD  20742-3255    USA   |
 
End of Part 2 of 2
