General Preamble:
-----------------
Allegro CL 3.0 Web Version for Windows (the "Web Version") is not
shareware, it is freeware subject to certain restrictions, and
published as a community service.  Giving the Web Version away for
free encourages more people to use it, and encourages the use of
Dynamic Object Oriented Programming.  Feel free to disseminate the
complete unmodified Web Version release package as widely as possible.
Give it to all your friends.  You may post it on any web site or
electronic bulletin board.

However, do not distribute a modified version of the Web Version under
the name "Allegro CL 3.0 Web Version for Windows" (or any other
similar name as determined by Franz) without first getting permission
from Franz.  Please respect this restriction.  The Web Version's
reputation for quality depends on maintaining strict quality control
on the Web Version's operation, look and feel.  Beyond that, ad hoc
"improvements" to the Web Version can affect interoperability, which
creates user confusion and compatibility problems that could damage
the Web Version's (and Franz') reputation and undermine the good will
earned by the Web Version trademark.

If you want to turn the Web Version into a commercial product and make
money selling it, then we must agree on a way for Franz to also make
money on it.  Thus, all commercial uses of the Web Version are
strictly prohibited without Franz consent.  For example, the Franz
license forbids you to use the Web Version to provide services or
products to others for which you are compensated in any manner (see
the license for full details of these and other commercial
restrictions) Therefore, if you want to use it in a commercial or
governmental setting, please contact VAR Sales at
 
 Franz Inc.  
 Attn: Var Sales
 1995 University Ave 
 Berkeley, CA 94704 
 510 548 3600 
 510 548 8253 (fax)
 info@franz.com 
 http://www.franz.com/


It is important that you read carefully and agree to the provisions of
the attached license agreement.  These provisions detail the
obligations imposed on you for using, modifying, copying and
distributing the Web Version.

Copyright and Trademark Notices:
--------------------------------
Allegro CL 3.0 Web Version for Windows is (c) Copyright Franz Inc.
1990-1996.  All rights reserved.  The on-line documentation and all
computers files are also copyright Franz Inc. 1990-1996.  All rights
reserved.  These rights include but are not limited to any foreign
language translations of the manual or the software, and all
derivative works of both.  The trademarks Allegro CL, Allegro CL for
Windows, Allegro CL 3.0 Web Version for Windows are the property of
Franz Inc.  ("Franz").  All other trademarks are the property of their
respective owners.

General License
---------------
 Franz Inc.
 1995 University Ave., #275
 Berkeley, CA 94704
 info@franz.com
 http://www.franz.com/
 510 548 3600 (phone)
 510 548 8253 (fax)

ATTENTION: READ CAREFULLY!
By using, copying, modifying or distributing the accompanying software
you indicate your acceptance of the following Franz End User License
Agreement.

FRANZ END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT - 10-12-95
Product: Allegro CL 3.0 Web Version for Windows

1. LICENSE. Franz Inc. ("Franz") hereby grants you (each licensee is
addressed as "you") a non-exclusive, transferable license to use its
accompanying software product known as "Allegro CL 3.0 Web Version for
Windows" and accompanying documentation (the program's object code,
accompanying source code [if any] provided by Franz, and documentation
are collectively referred to as the "Software") on the following terms
and only for non-commercial purposes (see Section 2 below).  You may:

a.  use the Software on any computer in your possession;

b.  make copies of the Software,

c.  distribute the Software only in the form originally furnished by
Franz with no modifications or additions whatsoever.  If you have the
slightest doubt that your copy of the Software is not original, you
must contact Franz for an original copy.  You may, however, distribute
additional programming code in source form only, and related
documentation (e.g., LISP application programs or code that alters the
operation of the Software) ("Additional Files") together with the
Software, provided that each Additional File must be stored in a file
separate from the Software, separately identified as required by
Section 2.c. below.

YOU MAY NOT MODIFY OR OTHERWISE PREPARE DERIVATIVE WORKS OF THE SOFTWARE.

2. LIMITATIONS ON LICENSE.  The license granted in Section 1 is
subject to the following restrictions:

a.  The Software is to be used only for non-commercial purposes unless
you obtain Franz's prior written consent otherwise.  Prohibited
commercial purposes include, but are not limited to:

 (i) licensing or renting the Software to third parties for a fee
(whether direct or indirect);

 (ii) using the Software to provide services or products to others for
which you are compensated in any manner, including without limitation,
support or maintenance for the Software;

 (iii) using, distributing, modifying, and copying the Software within
a government environment; or

 (iv) using the Software in any manner that is generally competitive
with a Franz product as defined by Franz.

However, media costs associated with the distribution of the Software
may be recovered; and the use, modification, distribution, or
duplication of the Software by universities or other educational
institutions solely for research or educational purposes shall not be
considered a commercial use provided such institutions comply with the
provisions of this Agreement.  You shall use your best effort to
promptly notify Franz upon learning of any violation of the above
commercial restrictions.

b.  On each copy of the Software you must conspicuously and
appropriately reproduce Franz's copyright notices (see Software for
examples of such notices) and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact this
Agreement and all notices that refer to this Agreement or any absence
of warranty (whether written or interactively displayed); and give any
other recipients of the Software a copy of this Agreement.

c.  You may not modify or otherwise prepare derivative works of the
Software.  You may, however, distribute additional programming code in
source form only, and related documentation (e.g., LISP application
programs or code that alters the operation of the Software)
("Additional Files") together with the Software, provided that each
Additional File must be stored in a file separate from the Software.
Each Additional File must carry prominent and conspicuous notices
stating the date of its creation, and the name, street address,
telephone number, and electronic mail address of the person
responsible for their creation.

d.  In order to preserve the value of the Franz name and/or any
trademarks, service marks, trade dress adopted and/or used by Franz
from time to time, you shall not make use of any of them for any
reason (e.g., with respect to an Additional File, in advertising,
marketing your own products, press releases, or other publicity)
except solely as may be expressly authorized by this Agreement or by
the prior written consent of Franz.

e.  Franz, in its sole and absolute discretion, may have included a
portion of the source code or online documentation of the Software.
Except for any such portions, you shall not REVERSE ENGINEER,
DECOMPILE, DISASSEMBLE, OR OTHERWISE REDUCE ANY PORTION OF THE
SOFTWARE TO ANY HUMAN PERCEIVABLE FORM, except to the extent this
restriction is prohibited by applicable law.

3.  DISTRIBUTION: As used in this Agreement, the term "distribute"
(and its variants) includes making the Software available (either
intentionally or unintentionally) to third parties for copying or use,
including providing timeshare access.  Each time you distribute the
Software, the recipient automatically receives this license to use,
copy, distribute or modify the Software subject to these terms and
conditions.  You may not impose any further restrictions on the
recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.  You are not
responsible for enforcing compliance with this Agreement by
recipients.

4.  TITLE.  Title, ownership rights, and intellectual property rights
in and to the Software, and each copy thereof, (including all
copyrights therein) shall remain in Franz.  The Software is protected
by the copyright laws of the United States and international copyright
treaties.

5.  NO FRANZ OBLIGATION.  You are solely responsible for all of your
costs and expenses incurred in connection with the distribution of the
Software, and Franz shall have no liability, obligation or
responsibility therefor.  Franz shall have no obligation to provide
maintenance, support, upgrades or new releases to you or to any
distributee of the Software.

6.  NO WARRANTY.  BECAUSE THE SOFTWARE IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE,
THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE SOFTWARE.  FRANZ PROVIDES THE SOFTWARE
"AS IS," AND FRANZ, ITS DISTRIBUTORS AND SUPPLIERS, AND ALL OTHER
PERSONS WHO HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN THE CREATION, PRODUCTION, OR
DELIVERY OF THE SOFTWARE, DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EITHER
EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE RESULTS, QUALITY AND
PERFORMANCE OF THE SOFTWARE IS WITH YOU AND YOUR DISTRIBUTEES.  SHOULD
THE SOFTWARE PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU AND YOUR DISTRIBUTEES (AND NOT
FRANZ) ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR
CORRECTION.  FRANZ MAKES NO WARRANTY OF NONINFRINGEMENT OF THE
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES.

7.  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.  UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO
LEGAL THEORY, TORT, CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL FRANZ, ITS
DISTRIBUTORS AND SUPPLIERS, OR ANY OTHER PERSON WHO HAS BEEN INVOLVED
IN THE CREATIONS, PRODUCTION, OR DELIVERY OF THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE TO
YOU OR ANY OTHER PERSON FOR ANY GENERAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, OR OTHER DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER ARISING
OUT OF THIS AGREEMENT OR THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE SOFTWARE,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO PERSONAL INJURY, LOSS OF PROFITS, LOSS OF
DATA, OUTPUT FROM THE SOFTWARE OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE,
FAILURE OF THE SOFTWARE TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS, DAMAGES
FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION, COMPUTER FAILURE OR
MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER DAMAGES OR LOSSES OF WHATEVER
NATURE, EVEN IF FRANZ HAS BEEN INFORMED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

8.  INDEMNIFICATION.  You and your distributees shall defend,
indemnify and hold harmless Franz, its distributors and suppliers, and
all other persons who have been involved in the creation, production,
or delivery of the Software, from any claim, demand, liability, damage
award, suit, judgment, or other legal action (including reasonable
attorney's fees) arising out of your use, distribution, modification,
or duplication of the Software or Additional Files.

9.  TERMINATION.  The license granted hereunder is effective until
terminated or until Jan. 1, 1998, whichever comes first.  You may
terminate it at any time by destroying the Software.  This license
will terminate automatically if you fail to comply with the
limitations described above.  On termination, you must destroy all
copies of the Software.  The termination of your license will not
result in the termination of the licenses of any distributees who have
received rights to the Software through you so long as they are in
compliance with the provisions of this Agreement.

10.  EXPORT CONTROLS.  None of the Software or underlying information
or technology may be downloaded or otherwise exported or re-exported
into (or to a national or resident of) any country in violation of the
laws and administrative regulations of the United States relating to
the control of exports of commodities and technical data.  By
downloading or using the Software, you are agreeing to the foregoing
and you are representing and warranting that you are not located in,
under the control of, or a national or resident of any such country.

11.  U. S. GOVERNMENT RESTRICTED RIGHTS.  The Software is provided
with RESTRICTED RIGHTS.  Use, duplication or disclosure by the United
States.  Government is subject to restrictions as set forth in
subparagraph (c)(1)(ii) of The Rights in Technical Data and Computer
Software clause at DFARS 252.227-7013 and in similar clauses in the
NASA FAR supplement, or subparagraphs (c)(1) and (2) of the Commercial
Computer Software -- Restricted Rights clause at 48 CFR 52.227-19, as
applicable.  Contractor/manufacturer is Franz Inc., 1995 University
Ave., #275, Berkeley, CA 94704.

12.  MISCELLANEOUS.  This Agreement represents the complete agreement
concerning this license between the parties and supersedes all prior
agreements and representations between them.  It may not be amended.
If any provision of this Agreement is held to be unenforceable for any
reason, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary
to make it enforceable, and all other provisions shall be unaffected
and remain enforceable.  This Agreement shall be governed by and
construed under California law as such law applies to agreements
between California residents entered into and to be performed within
California, except as governed by U.S. federal law.  The application
of the United Nations Convention of Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods is expressly excluded.  Address all correspondence
regarding this license to:

 Franz Inc.
 Attn:  Legal Department
 1995 University Ave., #275
 Berkeley, CA 94704
 510-548-3600
 510-548-8253 (fax)


ATTENTION:  READ CAREFULLY!
By using, copying, modifying or distributing the accompanying software
you indicate your acceptance of the above Franz End User License
Agreement.

