
     Conc produces concordances of texts. A concordance consists 
of a list of the words in the text with a short section of the 
context that precedes and follows each word. Conc also produces 
an index, consisting of a list of the distinct words in the text, 
each with the number of times it occurs and a list of the places 
where it occurs. Conc displays the original text, the 
concordance, and the index each in its own window. Clicking on a 
word in any one of the three windows causes the other two windows 
to display the entries for the same word.

     Conc permits the user to define the sorting order and to 
limit the concordance to words that match specified patterns 
(GREP expressions).

     Conc will do concordances both on ordinary flat text files 
and also on multiple-line interlinear texts. In the case of 
interlinear texts, the concordance can be limited to selected 
lines (fields). In addition to word concording, Conc can also 
produce a concordance of each letter in a text or body of 
phonological data. Pattern-matching facilities are also available 
to letter concordances, so the user can specify search patterns 
that will have the effect of retrieving, say, words containing 
intervocalic obstruents.

     Concordances can be both printed and exported to plain text 
files. As for performance, on a Mac IIci Conc can produce a 
concordance of Moby Dick (1,177KB) in about 13 minutes and 
requires about 2,500KB of memory.

     Documentation is included on-disk in a Microsoft Word file.  
Conc was written by John Thomson of SIL.

     Version 1.71 replaces version 1.70.  Differences include a few
bug fixes and a couple modest ehnancements.

Evan Antworth
Summer Institute of Linguistics
7500 W. Camp Wisdom Road
Dallas, TX  75236
U.S.A.
tel 214-709-2418
fax 214-709-2433
e-mail antworth@am.dallas.sil.org, evan@sil.org
