
----------------------------------------------------------
                        ANNOUNCEMENT

        OC1 is now available via Anonymous FTP.
----------------------------------------------------------

     OC1 (Oblique Classifier 1) is a multivariate decision tree
induction system designed for applications where the instances have
numeric feature values.  OC1 builds decision trees that contain linear
combinations of one or more attributes at each internal node; these
trees then partition the space of examples with both oblique and
axis-parallel hyperplanes.  OC1 has been used for classification of
data from several real world domains, such as astronomy and cancer
diagnosis.  A technical decription of the algorithm can be found in
the AAAI-93 paper by Sreerama K. Murthy, Simon Kasif, Steven Salzberg
and Richard Beigel.  A postscript version of this paper is provided
with the package.

     OC1 is a written entirely in ANSI C. It incorporates a number of
features intended to support flexible experimentation on real and
artificial data sets.  We have provided support for cross-validation
experiments, generation of artificial data, and graphical display of
data sets and decision trees.  The OC1 software allows the user to
create both standard, axis-parallel decision trees and oblique
(multivariate) trees.

        TO OBTAIN OC1 BY ANONYMOUS FTP
        --------------------------------

     The latest version of OC1 is available free of charge, and may be
obtained via anonymous FTP from the Department of Computer Science at
Johns Hopkins University.

     To obtain a copy of OC1, type the following commands:

     UNIX_prompt>  ftp ftp.cs.jhu.edu
[Note: the Internet address of ftp.cs.jhu.edu is currently 128.220.13.50]
     Name: anonymous
     Password: [enter your email address]

     ftp>  bin
     ftp>  cd pub/oc1
     ftp>  get oc1.tar.Z
[This announcement is also contained in pub/oc1.]
     ftp>  bye

[Place the file oc1.tar.Z in a convenient subdirectory.]

     UNIX_prompt> uncompress oc1.tar.Z
     UNIX_prompt> tar -xf oc1.tar

[Read the file "README", to get cues to other documentation files, and
 to run the programs.]


If you have any comments, questions or suggestions, please contact

       Sreerama K. Murthy or
       Steven Salzberg or
       Simon Kasif
       Department of Computer Science
       The Johns Hopkins University
       Baltimore, MD 21218
       Email:  murthy@cs.jhu.edu (primary contact)
               salzberg@cs.jhu.edu
               kasif@cs.jhu.edu

OC1 IS INTENDED FOR NON-COMMERCIAL PURPOSES ONLY.  OC1 may be used,
copied, and modified freely for this purpose.  Any commercial use of
OC1 is strictly prohibited without the express written consent of
Sreerama K. Murthy, Simon Kasif, and Steven Salzberg, at the
Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
