
 Amzi! inc.
                                                  tel 508/897-7332
 40 Samuel Prescott Drive                         fax 508/897-2784
 Stow, MA 01775  U.S.A.                           amzi@world.std.com
_____________________________________________________________________


FOR RELEASE ON SEPTEMBER 1				
Contact:	Mary Merritt
		508/897-7332




                Add Your Own Prolog Logic Server

                 to C/C++, Visual Basic and More


 
July 11, 1994 - STOW, MA--The new 3.0 release of Cogent Prolog(TM)
features a Logic Server(TM) API (application program interface)
enabling Windows, DOS and Alpha programmers to easily integrate the
symbolic reasoning power of Prolog with conventional applications.

Dennis Merritt, lead developer of Cogent 3.0 explained "We believe
embedded Prolog is an ideal solution for managing increased
application-complexity.  Prolog can readily be used to enhance any
program with logic services such as expert advice, front-line 
technical support, intelligent help, and automatic system
configuration and tuning."

The Cogent Prolog Logic Server API provides over 50 functions for
interacting with Prolog code and data, and for extending the Cogent
runtime to directly access GUI tool kits, database APIs, multimedia
or any of the other facilities available to the C/C++ programmer.  It
is available as:

    - a Windows dynamic library (DLL) for use by any Windows 
      development environment such as Visual Basic, Access and a 
      variety of C/C++ systems

    - 16 and 32-bit static link libraries for use with Windows and DOS 
      C/C++ tools

    - a C++ wrapper that makes the Logic Server and object, and

    - a 64-bit DEC Alpha OSF/1 C/C++ library

Cogent Prolog is a full-featured, Edinburgh-standard (non-typed)
Prolog development system, including a compiler, interpreter
(listener), interactive development environment, debugger, Logic
Server API, and royalty-free, distributable runtime.

The full Cogent Prolog development system either DOS or Windows is
$248; for both, it is $298.  (Cogent Prolog source and object code is
portable across platforms so it can be developed in one environment
and deployed in another.)  Subsets of the full system are also
available starting with the interpreter-only for $49.  

In addition to Cogent Prolog, Amzi! offers an interactive Prolog
tutorial, an expert systems tutorial with full source code
prototypes, books, toolboxes, training and consulting.



* Microsoft Windows, Visual Basic and Access are trademarks of 
  Microsoft Corp.  Alpha is a trademark of DEC.
