			XSB LICENSE AGREEMENT
		======================================

            Copyright (C) 1986 SUNY at Stony Brook, 
			  1990 ECRC,
			  1993 SUNY at Stony Brook
	   --------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------------------------------

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
license, but changing it is not allowed.

The license agreements of most software companies keep you at the
mercy of those companies.  By contrast, our general public license is
intended to give everyone the right to share XSB.  To make sure that
you get the rights we want you to have, we need to make restrictions
that forbid anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender
the rights.  Hence this license agreement.

Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to give
away copies of XSB, that you receive source code or else can get it if
you want it, that you can change XSB or use pieces of it in new free
programs, and that you know you can do these things.

To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to
deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute
copies of XSB, you must give the recipients all the rights that you
have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code.  And you must tell them their rights.

Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds
out that there is no warranty for XSB.  If XSB is modified by someone
else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have
is not what we distributed, so that any problems introduced by others
will not reflect on our reputation.

Therefore we make the following terms which say what you must do to be
allowed to distribute or change XSB.

			COPYING POLICIES
			----------------

  1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of XSB source code as
you receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and
appropriately publish on each file a valid copyright notice such as
"Copyright (C) 1986,1993 SUNY at Stony Brook, 1990 ECRC", containing
the year of last change and name of copyright holder for the file in
question; keep intact the notices on all files that refer to this
License Agreement and to the absence of any warranty; and give any
other recipients of the XSB program a copy of this License Agreement
along with the program.

  2. You may modify your copy or copies of XSB source code or any
portion of it, and copy and distribute such modifications under the
terms of Paragraph 1 above, provided that you also do the following:

    a) cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating
    who last changed such files and the date of any change; and

    b) cause the whole of any work that you distribute or publish,
    that in whole or in part contains or is a derivative of XSB
    or any part thereof, to be freely distributed
    and licensed to all third parties on terms identical to those
    contained in this License Agreement (except that you may choose
    to grant more extensive warranty protection to third parties,
    at your option).

  3. You may copy and distribute XSB or any portion of it in compiled,
executable or object code form under the terms of Paragraphs 1 and 2
above provided that you do the following:

    a) cause each such copy of XSB to be accompanied by the
    corresponding machine-readable source code; or

    b) cause each such copy of XSB to be accompanied by a
    written offer, with no time limit, to give any third party
    free (except for a nominal shipping charge) machine readable
    copy of the corresponding source code; or

    c) in the case of a recipient of XSB in compiled, executable
    or object code form (without the corresponding source code) you
    shall cause copies you distribute to be accompanied by a copy
    of the written offer of source code which you received along
    with the copy of XSB.

  4. You may not copy, sublicense, distribute or transfer XSB
except as expressly provided under this License Agreement.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, sublicense, distribute or transfer XSB is void and
your rights to use XSB under this License agreement shall be
automatically terminated.  However, parties who have received computer
software programs from you with this License Agreement will not have
their licenses terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.

Your comments and suggestions about our licensing policies and our
software are welcome!  Please contact 

	XSB research group
	Computer Science Dept.
	SUNY at Stony Brook
	Stony Brook, NY 11794
	xsb-contact@cs.sunysb.edu


			 NO WARRANTY
			--------------

Because XSB is licensed free of charge, we provide absolutely NO
WARRANTY.  Except when otherwise stated in writing, SUNY at Stony
Brook, and/or other parties provide XSB "as is" without warranty of
any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to,
the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular
purpose.  The entire risk as to the quality and performance of the
program is with you.  Should the XSB program prove defective, you
assume the cost of all necessary servicing, repair or correction.

In no event unless required by applicable law will SUNY at Stony Brook
and/or any other party who may modify and redistribute XSB as
permitted above, be liable to you for damages, including any lost
profits, lost monies, or other special, incidental or consequential
damages arising out of the use or inability to use (including but not
limited to loss of data or data being rendered inaccurate or losses
sustained by third parties or a failure of the program to operate with
any other program) the program, even if you have been advised of the
possibility of such damages, or for any claim by any other party.

---
This license is adapted from the SB-Prolog General Public License,
which is in turn adpated from the GnuEmacs General Public License, (c)
Richard Stallman, 1985.
---
