Dear people,

I would like to present a new natural language front end
for relational databases in dBASE compatible format. This
front end has a working name InterBASE, accidentally
coincided with Borland Interbase - interdatabase server,
but our Interbase has nothing to do with Borland's.

The InterBASE system was developed by a team of two
programmers and one linguist and won the first award of the
(former USSR) Association of Artificial Intelligence in
1990.  Also it was a finalist the "Software in Europe"
contest, CeBIT'93, Hannover, Germany.  CeBIT'93 is one of
the biggest software fairs in the world this year.  The
result of the InterBASE was the finalist was a
free-of-charge stand to expose the InterBASE system during
CeBIT'93.

InterBASE is not copyrighted, not shareware, not public
domain.  It is just an attempt to advertise a couple of
guys, who are not still known ubiquitously, but who would
like to. Indeed we are looking for a job anywhere to be
able to continue our work as a little team.


Copy the following files:

     interbas.exe
     interba1.exe
     interbas.txt - this file

These are self-extracting archives for MS-DOS. Just copy
them to a separate directory and run them. Further
installation procedure is obvious.

Prehistory and motivation
==========================

Our group has been doing with natural language processing
for several years.  We have good results in developing NL
interfaces to diverse software systems.  One of them is a
system for constructing natural language interfaces for
databases in xBase format for MS-DOS.

The other result is Lingua.F - Software Factory of
Linguistic Processors.

In this demo, we present an English demo version of the
InterBASE system together with a series of demo linguistic
processors for various applied software systems.  There are
additional text materials:  our resumes, a pair of papers
on InterBASE and Lingua.F, our proposals (see *.TXT).


Now we work in different locations:  Moscow (Russia),
Darmstadt (Germany).  Our ultimate goal is to gather again
and continue our work in a team. We are looking for a job.
Some research (applied) groups that deal with NLP, AI
applications, intelligent information systems, intelligent
teaching systems, ODBMSs would be that very place where we
could continue our work as a little team of two qualified
programmers, researchers, who have wide area of interests
and good scientific and professional ambitions. In utter
case we are ready to take up any work in
software/information area that somehow concerns databases
or/and programming in C/C++, Pascal, assembler in diverse
computers.

Brief information and addresses are as follows.


1. Sergei P. Trapeznikov, 1957,

   leader  of  the  NLI's  group,  candidate  of   technical
   science, programmer.

Current position:

   head of department,
   Russian  Research  Institute  of Artificial Intelligence,
   Moscow.

2. Sergei I. Kuchin, 1963,

   main implementator of the NLI's project, programmer.

Current position:

   guest  participant  of  a  research project in Integrated
   Information and Publication System Institute (GMD  IPSI),
   Darmstadt, Germany.   A project  goal is  the prototyping
   of a multimedia DOODBMS.

Please, contact on:

Postal address

     till July 1, 1993

        Sergei Kuchin (bei Maria Kostial)
        Fichtenweg 14, Reinheim 6107,
        BRD

     from July 1, 1993

        Sergei Kuchin (bei Maria Kostial)
        Fichtenweg 14, Reinheim 64354,
        BRD

E-mail address

   Sergei Kuchin: kuchin@darmstadt.gmd.de

Phones

   Sergei Kuchin: ++49/6151-869948 (office)
                  ++49/6162-81376 (home)
